THIS IS A DRAFT DOCUMENT - Updated on the 21/12/2017

This is a brief description of how to organise and run the Cancer Genomics Workshop including tips on how to organise the days, interactive activities and sections that can cause issues. This is not an exhaustive list of tips for organising the Cancer Genomics Workshops and the ideal way to run this workshop will depend on the attendee experience, expectations and trainers preference. 

#Background 
The Cancer Genomics Workshop was developed as part of an ongoing collaboration with EMBL-EBI. 8 Australia trainers attended an EMBL-EBI Cancer Genomics Workshop, followed by a 2-day train-the-trainer workshop. The Australian cohort of trainers used content, themes and concepts from the EMBL-EBI workshop and modified them to suit Australian audiences. The team also utilised material and infrastructure developed from previous Bioplatforms-CSIRO workshops. This workshop consists of the following modules:

Introduction to Command-line 
Fundamentals in NGS (presentation)
NGS Quality Control
Read Alignment with BWA
Single Nucleotide Variant Call and Annotation
Copy Number Variation
Structural Variant Analysis
Variants Visualization
Somatic Mutation Analysis

The order the Introduction to Command-line and Fundamentals in NGS often change depending on the attendee experience with the command-line (time required to deliver the command-line module) and trainers preference. 

#Modules
This section describes some considerations and tips for optimal delivery of content. Workshop timetable attached here for your reference. Please note that times often change to ensure the workshop is completed in whole, with time often taken from breaks (lunch breaks less than 30min not recommended). 

## Optional - Ice-breaker section 

Please see ice-breaker questionnaire attached here: 

##Introduction to Command-line 
The time to run this section is very dependant on the confidence and programming experience of the attendees. It is always good to allow extra time in this section, if the attends have no experience with the command-line. 

There are advance sections of this module, that can be difficult for even the most advanced attendee (or trainer) and have been including to occupy attendees with strong programming experience and not intended for all attendees. It is often important to make this clear so attendees do not feel nervous about the command-line. 

Needs at least 1hour 15min if most of the class has no experience. Would help if attendees did some training beforehand. 

##Fundamentals in NGS (presentation)
This presentation is updated before each workshop particularly if there has been a recent technological development. 

##NGS Quality Control
Run time consistant generally dependant on command-line experience of the group. 

##Read Alignment with BWA
Run time consistant generally dependant on command-line experience of the group. 

##Single Nucleotide Variant Call and Annotation
The SNV module is long and the timing needs to be revised, especially if attendees are not experienced with the command-line. It would benifit more precomputed commands. 

Might need to move to HG38 for next workshop. 

Optional interactive exercise for SNV section: print up 4 or 5 (depending on number of attendees) groups of flash cards with the categories/steps/QC sections. Get them to organise the flow chart in groups. Diagram of previous flow chart in Cancer repo. 

Person leading SNV sections can then have a pre-printed cards (large) that they can stick on the wall as the attendees look at their flow diagrams and help construct the flow diagram. By getting them to do it first, they can chat amongst the group and try understand the steps more.

##Copy Number Variation
Run 40 min CNV command at start of practical (before the break) or provide it as pre-computed data only. Sequenza tool – might be good to move to ASKAT or another more commonly used tools. There are new tools that might be worth investigating. 

##Structural Variant Analysis
Complex section. Include a section on how DNA breaks for next workshop. Translocations explanation could be enhanced by the post it note exercise (which will need more time from somewhere) as well as presentation with annimation.  Could remove one of the signatures and instead create a post-it note prac on the wall. This can be away of reaffirming expected results. 

Add a bit more detail to the assembly section and talk about the new tools that are becoming available. Delly – needs updating version. 

##Somatic Mutation Analysis/Cohort Analysis
Was useful as it gave context to analysis. Some typos that will need to be fixed.

##Special guest leturer - ties together practice and research with clinic
